Autoreborrow traits (PR to allow for comments on draft-RFC) (#1)
gmorenz/rfcs: text/0000-autoreborrow-traits.md

- Feature Name: autoreborrow-traits
- Start Date: 2025-04-15
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue:
  [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary

[summary]: #summary

Enable users to opt into automatic reborrowing of custom reference-like types.

# Motivation

[motivation]: #motivation

Reborrowing of shared references and exclusive references is an important
feature in Rust, enabling much of the borrow checker's work. This important
feature is not available for reference wrappers or user-defined reference-like
types, which hampers the usefulness of language when working with these kinds of
types. Manual reborrowing-like functions can be implemented but they must be
explicitly called making them verbose, and are importantly always limited to
creating local sub-lifetimes that cannot expand to the parent lifetime.

Examples of features unlocked by this RFC are:

- Automatic reborrowing of `Option<&mut T>`.

> - Automatic reborrowing of custom reference types like `Ref<'_, T>` and

Author: We want some form of automatic reborrowing into `Ref`. Is there a use case for automatic reborrowing of `Ref`?

As far as I can tell `&T` shared references aren't automatically reborrowed today.  E.g.

```rust
fn same_lifetimes<'a>(_: &'a u8, _: &'a u8) {}

fn main() {
    let x: &'static u8 = &2;
    let y = 3;
    let z = &y;
    same_lifetimes(x, z);

    let mut a = 3;
    let b = &mut a;
    same_lifetimes(b, z);
}
```

compiles to

```
    bb0: {
        _1 = const main::promoted[0];
        _2 = const 3_u8;
        _3 = &_2;
        _4 = same_lifetimes(copy _1, copy _3) -> [return: bb1, unwind continue];
    }

    bb1: {
        _6 = const 3_u8;
        _5 = &mut _6;
        _8 = &(*_5);
        _7 = same_lifetimes(move _8, copy _3) -> [return: bb2, unwind continue];
    }

    bb2: {
        return;
    }
```

In `bb1` we see the implicit reborrow with the mutable pointer assigned to `_8`. In `bb0` there is no equivalent, we just copy the value relying on coercion.

We might want to traits because we might want to be able to do exclusive->exclusive reborrowing on types without a shared counter part for exclusive->shared reborrowing, but I don't see why we need to implement the shared trait for non-exclusive sources.

(also in reply to the heading "A note on `Reborrow` and `Copy`")

Reviewer: You're absolutely correct: reborrowing of shared references doesn't actually (seem to) make any real sense.

Although! There is actually a reborrowing-adjacent feature where it would make sense: I was informed that if reborrowing was allowed to have custom code in it, then reborrowing could be expanded to encompass reference counting with something like `RcRef<'_, T>` incrementing the reference count on reborrow. The reason why this could conceivably be thought of as reborrowing is that you could safely return any `RcRef` all the way to the top of the reborrow-chain even though any number of intermediate `RcRef`s might've been dropped in the meantime.

But, I think this is mostly covered by the reference counting convenience work going on in the `foo.use` experiment.

Author: Hmm, `RcRef` probably wouldn't even need to increment the reference count, since it can be guaranteed that its parent RC holds a reference-count-increment. The same way that you can pass `&Rc<T>` around to avoid incrementing the count except without the extra indirection.

Reviewer: IIUC, you cannot know how many `RcRef`s you have (or `RcMut`s for that matter) or where and in what order do they drop, thus you must reference count them. Both types are created from the source `RefCell` through a `&` so it's possible to create both at runtime and get a panic for your efforts (if this wasn't possible, then you wouldn't have any use for refcounting in the first place and would just use borrow checking). And when a new `RcRef` is created from another `RcRef`, it does not invalidate the previous one nor does it bind its lifetime to the previous one; it purely performs a clone. So there is no single "source `RcRef`" from which all others trace their lineage. All `RcRef`s instead trace their lineage to the source `RefCell` and only care about its lifetime; as long as it lives, we can have any amount of reference counted references to it, as long as we don't mix and match ref and mut. As these `RcRef`s can be dropped in any order, we cannot statically know when the "last" or only reference count needs to be decremented.

And the same applies for `RcMut` (actual name `RefMut` in std): the `RefMut::split_mut` method takes by value a single `RefMut` and returns two `RefMut`s of smaller parts of the referenced data. One of these `RefMut`s is conceptually the `RefMut` taken by-value to the method, and one is created by calling a private clone method call times. The resulting `RefMut`s both trace their lineage to the `RefCell` and not to the original `RefMut`. Hence, the lifetime of these is not stack-like, the last one to drop can be either one of them. In effect, again we cannot statically know when the "last" or only reference count needs to be decremented.

  `Mut<'_, T>`.
- Returning of values deriving from reborrowed parameters, expanding to the
  source lifetime.

# Guide-level explanation

[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

A reference _reborrow_ is essentially a _copy_ of a pointer with extra lifetime
analysis. The lifetime of the reborrowed reference is a subset of the source

> reference, including any lifetime expansion. For exclusive references, the

Author: It's probably more accurate to talk about the nature of the reborrow than the reference. Since you can non-exclusively reborrow an exclusive reference

```suggestion
reference, including any lifetime expansion. For exclusive reborrows, the
```

This also isn't quite complete. Shared-reborrows also disable writes to the source reference. It might be better to rephrase this paragraph in terms of borrowing the source reference?

types.

The following examples of reborrowing will be used later:

```rust
fn mixed_reborrowing(soure: &mut T) {
    let result: &mut U = source.mutate();
    // This cannot be called because of result usage keeping source disabled.
    // source.observe();
    result.observe();
    // Note: exclusive reference can be reborrowed as shared.
    let result1: &U = source.observe();
    // Note: the same exclusive reference can again be reborrowed as shared
    // while a shared reborrow result is still active.
    let result2: &U = source.observe();
    result1.observe();
    result2.observe();
    source.mutate();
}

fn returning_derived_mut(source: &mut T) -> &mut U {
    // Note: the reborrow that happens when calling mutate() expands its
    // lifetime to the lifetime of source, not to some local value conceptually
    // create here:
    // let reborrow = &mut *source;
    // reborrow.mutate()
    source.mutate()
}

fn returning_derived_mut(source: &mut T) -> &U {
    // Note: exclusive reference is reborrowed as shared for the return value.
    source.mutate()
}
```

The important things to note here are:

1. There are two types of reborrowing, shared and exclusive.

> 2. Only exclusive references can be reborrowed exclusively.

Author: This is a place where saying that `Reborrow` is only implemented on exclusive references would simplify things.

> 3. Reborrowing happens implicitly at each call-site.

Author: More generally probably all [coercion sites](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/type-coercions.html#coercion-sites)? Notably including return sites.

    // Note: In current Rust this would work, but after this the source has
    // been moved out of this function and could no longer be used.
    let result: Option<&mut U> = source.mutate();
    result.observe();

    // We want to enable the following calls to still work: this means that
    // the first mutate() call must reborrow source instead of moving it.
    // The following calls must also implicitly reborrow source as shared.
    let result1: Option<&U> = source.observe();
    let result2: Option<&U> = source.observe();
    result1.observe();
    result2.observe();
    // The source must still be available for exlusive reborrowing afterwards.
    source.mutate();
}

fn returning_derived_mut(source: Option<&mut T>) -> Option<&mut U> {
    // This does work today, but mutate() must map() the option instead of eg.
    // using as_deref_mut().
    source.mutate()
}

fn returning_derived_mut(source: Option<&mut T>) -> Option<&U> {
    // Note: This does not work today, and suggests using as_deref() which also
    // doesn't work, citing "returns a value referencing data owned by the
    // current function". Using map() and &* to explicitly reborrow the

>     // contained reference does work.

Author: Probably worth noting that the `map` doesn't need an *explicit* reborrow, just type information. This works:

```rust
fn returning_derived_mut<T>(source: Option<&mut T>) -> Option<&T> {
    source.map(|v| -> &T { v })
}
```

So there's a bit less distance between what is being proposed and explicit reborrows.

}
```

## Automatic reborrowing of custom reference types

Custom reference types are as many as there are users, but a common refrain
amongst them is that they usually hold one (though sometimes multiple) data
fields and a PhantomData field for holding a lifetime in. Examples from above
would now look like this:

```rust
/// Exclusive reborrowable reference to some data. Can be turned into a MyRef
/// by reborrowing as shared.
struct MyMut<'a>(...);
/// Shared reborrowable reference to some data.
struct MyRef<'a>(...);

fn mixed_reborrowing(soure: MyMut) {
    // Note: mutate() takes self by value, so MyMut would currently be moved
    // here.
    let result = source.mutate();
    result.observe();

    // We want to enable the following calls to still work: this means that
    // the first mutate() call must reborrow source instead of moving it.
    // The following calls must also implicitly reborrow source as shared.
    let result1: Option<&U> = source.observe();
    let result2: Option<&U> = source.observe();
    result1.observe();
    result2.observe();
    // The source must still be available for exlusive reborrowing afterwards.
    source.mutate();
}

> fn returning_derived_mut(source: Option<&mut T>) -> Option<&mut U> {

Author: I think you meant to change the reference types here?

```suggestion
fn returning_derived_mut(source: Option<MyMut<T>>) -> Option<MyMut<U>> {
```

Reviewer: Yup, seems like I got too tired when writing this and forgot to write out the rest :)

    // This does work today, but mutate() must map() the option instead of eg.
    // using as_deref_mut().
    source.mutate()
}

> fn returning_derived_mut(source: Option<&mut T>) -> Option<&U> {

Author: ```suggestion
fn returning_derived_mut(source: Option<MyMut<T>>) -> Option<MyRef<U>> {
```

    // Note: This does not work today, and suggests using as_deref() which also
    // doesn't work, citing "returns a value referencing data owned by the
    // current function". Using map() and &* to explicitly reborrow the
    // contained reference does work.
    source.mutate()
}
```

> A smattering of examples are:

Author: Bevy has a [handful](https://docs.rs/bevy/0.16.0-rc.5/bevy/app/trait.Plugin.html?search=reborrow) of examples. Probably the most interesting is the one on `Query` since semantically I don't think of that as a smart pointer.

### [GcScope and NoGcScope](https://github.com/trynova/nova/blob/260683fccbad913491c758781965eb3bf67b531e/nova_vm/src/engine/context.rs#L40-L78)

- Size: ZST.
- Kind: Marker types with no runtime existence. `GcScope` has two lifetimes, one
  lifetime is exclusive and one is shared. `NoGcScope` has two shared lifetimes.
  The always-shared lifetime is not very relevant to reborrowing and can be
  ignored here.
- Usage: `GcScope` provides exclusive access to a garbage collector, while its
  shared reborrow `NoGcScope` is used to create handles to garbage collected
  data. Handles are thus invalidated if `GcScope` is reborrowed as exclusive (or
  moved).

### [MutableHandle](https://doc.servo.org/mozjs/gc/struct.MutableHandle.html) and [Handle](https://doc.servo.org/mozjs/gc/struct.Handle.html)

- Size: Pointer-sized.
- Kind: `MutableHandle` is conceptually an exclusive reference type. `Handle` is
  a wrapper around a shared reference.
- Usage: `MutableHandle` is a reference type wrapping a raw pointer that can
  unsafely be turned into an exclusive reference on the condition that the
  garbage collector does not run while the exclusive reference exists. `Handle`

>   is a plain shared reference wrapper; the pointed-to value is either a pointer
>   to garbage collected data, is internally mutable, or is never mutated by the
>   garbage collector. (Or so I assume.)

Author: Your assumption is... aspirationally correct.

`Handle` is a shared reference to data traced by the non-relocating servo-GC. Frequently that data contains a pointer to data traced by the relocating spidermonkey-GC, and the GC mutates that pointer when it runs...

Currently (and going back for a long time) those pointers, despite being mutated, are not wrapped in internal mutability. Unsoundly. It's just a matter of putting in the work to wrap them in a cell types to fix this. Or at least that's the direction I think we will go to fix this.

```suggestion
  is a plain shared reference wrapper; the pointed-to value is (aspirationally)
  only mutated by the GC where it is internally mutable.
```

The purpose of `Handle` over `&T` is just to mark that the data referenced is tracked by the GC. In the many cases where servo doesn't care, it uses a `&T` instead of a `Handle<T>` with the same issues... so changing `Handle<T>` to hold a `*const T` doesn't really fix anything.

`Mat` is an owned rectangular matrix while `MatMut`, `MatRef`, `ColMut`, and
`ColRef` are various kinds of custom reference types over the source `Mat`.

- Size: Usually 5 pointer-sizes for `MatMut` and `MatRef`, 3 for `ColMut` and
  `ColRef`.
- Kind: `MatMut` and `ColMut` are exclusive reference types. `MatRef` and
  `ColRef` are shared reference types.
- Usage: Enable various near-zero-cost operations over matrices by binding the
  iteration to the original `Mat` through the reference types while statically
  ensuring that indexed access is not required.

Note: `Mat` is also reborrowable into `MatMut` and `MatRef`, but also has a
`Drop` implementation. If reborrowing is understood to act on lifetimes of
reference-like types, then reborrowing `Mat` is outside that definition as it
neither has a lifetime nor is a reference-like type. It could be argued that
`Mat` does have an implied `'static` lifetime, but the lack reference-like
aspects of it at least cannot be denied. It might be that this use-case would be

> better understood as a generalised `AsRef` implementation.

Author: I think more `Deref[Mut]` than `AsRef`, since it's implicit coercion? `Mat` feels out of scope except to the extent that some generalized coercion trait might capture both reborrowing and deref.

These types do not implement reborrowing, but cxx is interested in automatic
coercion between the different C++ reference types. Since these are pointer
wrapping types, some forms of autoreborrowing would make these coercions
possible.

## A note on `Reborrow` and `Copy`

When dealing with shared references, reborrowing is not actually necessary. A
shared reference ought to be `Copy` by virtue of being shareable, so for them
implementing `Reborrow` is mostly unnecessary. The only reason that the
`Reborrow` trait exists alongside `ReborrowMut` is because of the need to coerce
exclusive references into shared references.

# Reference-level explanation

[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

Reborrowing itself should be a fairly direct and "easy-to-grasp" feature in how
it works; reference wrappers and custom reference types should be able to opt-in
to reference-like reborrowing. This means that:

1. When such a type is used as a function parameter, the type is implicitly
   reborrowed.
2. When such a type is used as a function parameter and a value bound to the
   reborrowed type is returned, the lifetime is automatically expanded to the

>    calling context.

Author: As above, I don't understand what this means...

3. When such a type `T` is returned from a function that returns a different
   type `U` that `T` can be reborrowed into, the type is implicitly reborrowed.

The implementation of reborrowing, however, is not an immediately obvious
question. At least three main possibilities exist:

## `Reborrow` and `ReborrowMut` traits with a GAT and methods

Implement traits in the vein of the `reborrow` crate:

```rust
/// Immutable reborrowing.
trait Reborrow<'short, _Outlives = &'short Self> {
    type Target;

    #[must_use]

>     fn rb(&'short self) -> Self::Target;

Author: Nit: Since these are never called explicitly, they might as well be spelled out as `reborrow`.
